The intellectual atmosphere of the place was much more quickening than
might be thought. Insch is a cosy little village enough, and though not
in itself beautiful, has picturesque bits near it. But even in summer
sunshine it can hardly be called lively, and in winter, when the snow is
piled for weeks on hill and field, and the leaden-coloured clouds refuse
to part, it could not well look duller. But the Free Church manses of
the district were full of eager inquiry. The ministers were educated
men, graduates of the University, and in some cases had swept its
prizes. Their ambition was satisfied in the service of Christ. There was
a noble contentment with their lot which it is inspiring to think of;
but they cherished a righteous ambition for their children, and spared
no toil and no self-denial to open the way for them. From three Free
Church manses in that neighbourhood, all at first included in the same
Presbytery, have gone forth men whose names are familiar to the English
people. From the manse of Keig, Professor Robertson Smith; from Rhynie,
Mr. A. M. Mackay, of Uganda, the true successor to Livingstone, whose
early death is announced as these sheets are passing through the press;
and from Insch, Professor Elmslie. The educational facilities of the
district were of almost ideal excellence. The parish teachers, when
salaries were increased by certain wise and liberal bequests, were
almost without exception accomplished scholars. They took pride in a
promising pupil, and would cheerfully work extra hours to ensure his
success. Their fees were sufficiently moderate, one pound being enough
to cover all expenses for a year. At these schools a boy might remain
till he had reached the age, say, of fourteen or fifteen, when he might
go to Aberdeen to compete for a scholarship, or "bursary" as it was
called. Of these, perhaps forty were offered every year, varying from
Â£35 a year for the University course, downwards. It was thought wiser to
go for the last year or two to the Grammar School in Aberdeen, to
receive the last polish; but often lads went in from their native glens,
and defeated all competitors. Elmslie was trained at first in the Free
Church school at Insch, then at the parish school, under the Rev. James
McLachlan. He then proceeded to the Aberdeen Grammar School, where he
was two years, under the Rev. William Barrack, a teacher of rare
attainments and enthusiasm. He carried off one of the highest honours,
and in 1864 entered the University of Aberdeen.
